Once around planet five.
So we go back to 1596 and Johannes
Kepler.
He suggested that there was something
about the ratios of the orbits of the
planets in the known solar system
where there was some gaps.
In his publication Mysterium
Cosmographicum
he wrote that between Mars and Jupiter I
place a planet
saying that God's design required one in
that location and another one between
Venus and Mercury in fact
trying to make sense of a geometrical
relationship between the sizes and
positions of the known planets.
Now, there is a law called the
Titius-Bode law. It's a rule of thumb, a
mathematical approximation that was
discovered by Johann Daniel Titius but
made famous by Johann
Ellert Bode. There are a lot of Johanns
in this story.
And it starts with Mercury at 0.4
astronomical units, the Earth being at
one and Saturn being at about 10
and makes a mathematical prediction that
you need to keep adding 0.3 * 2 to the
power of n where n is your planet number
except Venus is planet naught and Earth
is planet one.
Mars is planet two in this sequence.
And it gets it quite accurate except for
the fact that for Mercury the value of n
really needs to be minus infinity so
that 2 to the power n is zero in this
rule. So it's a bit of a cheat at the
beginning.
But you can see that the observed value
0.39 is very close to 0.4, 0.72 for 0.7.
Of course Earth is exactly right, that's
fixed. 1.52 for Mars, 5.2 for Jupiter
and
9.54
rather than 10 for Saturn. It's still
quite close.
But there is something missing at 2.8.
And it was 1772 when Bode picked up on
this and started publicizing the idea
that a search for a missing fifth planet
should be carried out in this gap at 2.8
astronomical units from the Sun.
Well, nothing very much happened for 28
years but in 1800 a group was got
together, the celestial police, a dozen
very famous
uh astronomers,
uh the royal astronomer from the UK,
other famous astronomers from around
Europe and they divided the sky up into
12 search areas
with the idea of looking for this
missing planet and combining their
results.
But they were scooped in January of 1801
by Piazzi, not part of the celestial
police.
He happened to spot a small moving
object and computations of its orbit
showed that it was at 2.8 AU from the
Sun right in the gap where the
Titius-Bode law predicted.
He wanted to name it Ceres Ferdinandea.
Ceres, the god of farming, and King
Ferdinand of
the third of Sicily being the ruler of
the island on which he was doing the
observing. I think he was after royal
patronage wanting to be the astronomer
royal of Sicily under King Ferdinand
there.
But we now call it Ceres. We dropped the
Ferdinandea bit.
So that was 1801
and all seemed to be in order at this
point.
But in 1802 Olbers discovered another
object in roughly the same orbit in that
Mars-Jupiter gap and he gave it the name
Pallas
after a deity in mythology again and now
we have
the two objects in this
2.8 astronomical unit region.
Now he went on to suggest that
both Ceres and Pallas might be fragments
of an original larger planet that was
destroyed and
predicted that we might continue to find
more smaller chunks
to add to this field of debris between
Mars and Jupiter.
And it wasn't long before it started to
look even more like that.
In 1804 Harding found Juno and in 1807
Olbers himself found Vesta
giving considerable boost to the idea of
a fragmented planet. Of course all these
objects were so small and difficult to
see at the time that they just looked
like points of light and we didn't know
very much about them at all. The images
on the right are much more modern, more
powerful uh
observations from
uh the Earth or indeed the top two,
Ceres and Vesta, from the Dawn
spacecraft that visited and is still in
orbit round Ceres.
So we had four objects in this zone,
again possibly the fragments of a
destroyed planet.
After 40 years of not finding anything
the floodgates really opened though.
uh another one, Astraea, was found and
by 1849
we were up to 10 with the discovery of
Hygiea.
Now we it's millions and we call this
region the asteroid belt. Uh asteroid
meaning star-like because they were
still so small that we couldn't see them
as anything other than points of light.
Uh a very bad name really.
But in 1823
retired teacher Johann, another one,
Radloff put forward the name of Phaethon
for the
object that had been destroyed, this
mystery fifth planet of which we were
finding all the fragments.
Again from Greek mythology, the son of
the sun god Helios
also spelt Phaeton
in two different ways and of course
originally comes from the Greek which
I'm not going to read out.
In mythology Phaethon
tried to steal and drive his father's
solar chariot for a day racing around
causing a disastrous accident and was
ultimately destroyed by Zeus which of
course in Roman mythology is Jupiter.
So actually quite appropriate in many
ways thinking perhaps that
Phaethon had been destroyed by its
proximity to Jupiter in the solar
system.
Now this chap Kugler wrote a book in
1927 having
studied the ancient Sibylline texts and
he wrote it in uh
German there but translates as the
Sibylline battle of the stars and
Phaethon seen as natural history. So he
was interpreting these ancient stories
of doom and disaster and lights in the
sky
as the appearance of Phaethon
in around 1500 BC as a very bright
object in the sky
and then that it fragmented and fell to
Earth as a shower of meteorites all
across Africa creating a bombardment
leading to catastrophe, fire, flood and
disaster.
Now it's probably not true um and is
very sort of liberal interpretation of
the meaning of these ancient poetic
texts.
So uh an interesting story but perhaps
one that can be consigned to history I
think.
As is the case with this one.
1953, quite modern times really, Russian
astronomer Putilin suggested that
Phaethon was a large planet
bigger than Mars, 4,280
miles in diameter, so 6 1/2 thousand
kilometers, something like that
and spinning in just 2.6 hours. Mars
rotates in 24 hours, this is going 10
times faster
and he suggested that the enormous
stress of this rapid rotation would tear
the thing apart through centrifugal
forces throwing off great lumps of the
planet and generating this fragmented
structure in the asteroid field that we
see today.
Not really plausible, the physics just
doesn't work. Um this was the sort of
theory that was used to explain the
formation of the Earth's moon as being a
chunk thrown out perhaps from the
Pacific Ocean basin by excessive spin in
the past but of course uh
that just doesn't hold uh true at all.
The Pacific Ocean's not always been
there, it's the product of continental
drift etc. etc. and the centrifugal
force idea just doesn't work.
More plausibly, tidal disruption of a
close pass by a giant planet like
Jupiter might have torn an object apart,
and maybe Phaethon
had a close encounter in an elliptical
orbit with Jupiter and got ripped apart,
and all the fragments are what we see in
the asteroid belt. Now, this actually
happened.
Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 came too close to
Jupiter and was torn apart into a whole
series of smaller fragments, which then
on the next pass crashed into Jupiter,
very spectacular
result. Um
So, this sort of event is certainly
possible, and we see the
result of that in crater chains on other
bodies around the solar system. So, it's
a plausible theory, but it's quite hard
to explain the orbits that we see and
the structures we see within the
asteroid belt on this basis.
The ideas continue, though. There was
the Nemesis hypothesis, the idea that
the Sun had a large brown dwarf-sized
companion, a super Jupiter rogue planet
in a very long elliptical orbit or
perhaps even free floating that came
through the solar system, causing mayhem
and chaos, and that possibly Phaethon
was destroyed by this or perhaps even
ejected from orbit out of the solar
system completely.
Well, yeah, there's just no evidence in
favor of this at all, really, but it's
an interesting idea.
What's more plausible is a cosmic
collision. We certainly think that
bodies like Mercury and the Earth and
possibly even Mars have suffered major
catastrophic impacts during the early
days of the formation of the solar
system. So, why not a fifth planet that
suffered a huge collision and was
fragmented? And that does seem to
be quite plausible and would perhaps
explain the orbits of the existing
fragments.
One variation on this by Savicenko
1955, he suggested that the former
planet Phaethon had a series of moons,
and that what we were seeing
was Ceres, Pallas, Juno, and Vesta being
four of the former moons of Phaethon.
Um that might make quite a lot of sense,
as well, with Phaethon being destroyed
perhaps by a fifth large moon or another
wandering planetoid smashing into it and
causing the existing moons to not have
anything to orbit and therefore to
continue on their way around the Sun
independently.
Quite an interesting idea.
Um
We will see just how that stacks up in a
moment.
But I want to go back to this guy,
Immanuel Kant.
Even before the discovery of any of the
asteroids,
it was his suggestion that the gap
between Mars and Jupiter
had been created by the gravity of
Jupiter.
And I think this is partially right.
Nowadays, when we look at all the
millions of known asteroids, we see a
lot of structure. We can see this
diagram of the solar system here with
the four inner planets, Mercury, Venus,
Earth, and Mars,
and then the shaded belts that form the
asteroid belts clearly in rings moving
outwards until we get to the outer
planet Jupiter,
and the
green belts
co-orbital with Jupiter, those are its
Trojan asteroids at the Lagrange points
L4 and L5.
But within the main asteroid belt, the
distribution
shows common thick regions and thinner
regions, and the gaps between these
belts are the Kirkwood gaps.
The graph at the bottom plots the region
from 2 to 3.5
astronomical units, so from beyond Mars
to most of the way to Jupiter,
and you can see the number of asteroids
at each position where there are gaps at
2.5
AU, just over 2.8, just about 2.96,
and then the edge of the asteroid belt
cuts off at about 3.27,
something like that.
Now, these gaps, where there are no
asteroids, are caused by interactions
with Jupiter's gravity.
At this distance from the Sun, an orbit
would have a period in a simple integer
ratio like 3:2 or 2:5 or 2:1
with the orbit of Jupiter, and a body
there would keep getting a
a kick from the
pull of Jupiter's gravity and would soon
end up deflected into a new orbit. They
just can't have stable orbits in these
locations. So, they get scattered into
orbits that are not in simple integer
ratios with Jupiter and therefore keep
getting different kicks
and remaining mostly stable over very
long periods of time.
So, it seems that it was the gravity of
Jupiter that was dictating what was
going on here,
and that
the
formation period of the solar system saw
Jupiter growing in mass and spiraling
inwards in towards the inner solar
system as it picked up all of the
material of the solar nebula and grew in
its own mass,
it would have lost angular momentum
against the friction of
plowing through all of this material and
spiraled inwards, and so those
Kirkwood gaps would have changed as
Jupiter's orbit changed, disrupting the
orbits of any of the objects that were
floating around in the asteroid belt
trying to get together to form planet
number five in that region.
In fact, what it does is it pumps the
orbits into more and more elliptical
paths,
and nice circular orbits are very good,
but elliptical paths tend to cross each
other a lot,
and so you end up with a lot of
high trajectory, high angled, high
energy impacts where bodies in crossing
orbits crash into each other, and the
violence of those crashes tends to be
destructive,
causing fragmentation
far more than the gentle kiss of a
couple of objects in near circular
orbits just nudging into each other,
which can lead to accretion and planet
building. And so, it seems that it was
the disruptive effect of Jupiter
perturbing all these bodies into
elliptical crossing orbits that caused
them to never really manage to build a
large enough object to start to have any
one object dominate the orbit and pull
everything into a single planet number
five.
And we can see the effects of that
chaos, because if we plot the orbit of
known asteroids with the semi-major
axis, the distance from the Sun along
the bottom, again from 2.2 to 3.2
astronomical units,
and we plot the orbital eccentricity of
their orbits up the side, you find that
you get these clouds, these groups,
asteroid families.
Typically, each asteroid family is named
after one of the large members. So,
Vesta has a family there in red, Flora
another one, and you can see the names
of others, Hygiea, Themis, and so on.
So, there are large tends to be a large
body within the group and a lot of
smaller ones. And we think that each of
these is the result of the fragmentation
that has been going on. So, something
struck the parent body of all of the
Flora group asteroids, um and fragmented
them into about 13,000
known asteroids just in that one group
on the left there. And the same is true
for all the others. These are all
fragments of lesser parent bodies, older
parent bodies, that have been broken up.
And this is just
a process that has continued for a very
long period of time with all of these
elliptical crossing orbits causing the
gradual fragmentation rather than the
coalescence and the accretion.
And I said I would come back to the
ideas of Phaethon itself. And one of the
problems with the idea is this.
The total amount of mass in all of those
millions of asteroids adds up to
around 2.3 to 2.4 * 10^21 kg, which is
only 4% of the mass of the Earth's moon.
And about 30% of that is Ceres, followed
by Vesta, Pallas, and so on.
Um
So, there really is just not enough mass
there to make an object more than about
double the radius of Ceres.
So, the chance of there being an object
the size of the Earth's moon or the size
of Mars, as has been suggested by many
of these ideas,
just doesn't really stack up unless an
awful lot of that material was scattered
and deflected out of the asteroid belt
to collide with Jupiter and be swallowed
up or to crash into the Earth or Mars.
Uh some people say to be deflected into
the Sun, but that's an incredibly
difficult thing to happen. You have to
lose pretty much all of your orbital
momentum. Um and a collision doing that
is quite problematic. There's a lot of
energy to be dissipated somehow if
you're going to just then plain fall
straight into the center of the Sun, but
uh it just doesn't seem quite right that
uh there is so little material left.
Now, it could be that the the so-called
late heavy bombardment that peppered the
moon and other objects in and around the
solar system about 3.8, 3.9 billion
years ago was the result of this Jupiter
in-spiraling event stirring up a lot of
these collisions uh and dissipating a
lot of material. But again, it just
doesn't seem like enough material can be
accounted for to uh have been a body of
the size of Mars.
Uh and just a final twist in the tail
here, Michael Ovenden, astronomer,
suggested not Phaethon but Krypton for
the name of the planet because in the
Superman stories uh Krypton was
destroyed and it seemed that uh perhaps
we could uh use Krypton for the name of
this planet. But uh Phaethon has been
the name for this hypothetical planet
that never was and that never grew up.
It never had a chance with Jupiter
coming and uh causing such mayhem in and
around that uh region beyond Mars.
Probably accounts for why Mars is not
quite so large as well.
So, there we have it. That was once
around planet number five. And thanks
very much for listening.